HOW TO DAY TRADE

    A Detailed Guide to Day Trading Strategies,
      Risk Management, and Trader Psychology

                   ROSS CAMERON
                                                                  AuthorHouseTM
                                                               1663 Liberty Drive
                                                            Bloomington, IN 47403
                                                            www.authorhouse.com
                                                           Phone: 1 (800) 839-8640

                                                © 2015 Ross Cameron. All rights reserved.

                             No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
                             transmitted by any means without the written permission of the author.

                                                  Published by AuthorHouse 05/03/2018

                                                        ISBN: 978-1-5049-5772-4 (sc)
                                                         ISBN: 978-1-5049-5773-1 (e)

                                           Library of Congress Control Number: 2015917812

                                               Print information available on the last page.

                                                  This book is printed on acid-free paper.

Because of the dynamic nature of the Internet, any web addresses or links contained in this book may have changed
since publication and may no longer be valid. The views expressed in this work are solely those of the author and do

  QRWQHFHVVDULO\UHÁHFWWKHYLHZVRIWKHSXEOLVKHUDQGWKHSXEOLVKHUKHUHE\GLVFODLPVDQ\UHVSRQVLELOLW\IRUWKHP
                 CONTENTS

Introduction................................................................................................................................................................ vii
Chapter 1 Why do most traders fail?............................................................................................................. 1
Chapter 2 Risk Management ............................................................................................................................ 6
Chapter 3 Stock Selection - Choosing the right stocks to trade.......................................................12
Chapter 4 Introduction to Candlesticks......................................................................................................23
Chapter 5 Setting Up Your Charts - Technical Indicators.....................................................................29
Chapter 6 Support and Resistance...............................................................................................................43
Chapter 7 Order Types, Level2, Time & Sales, Hotkeys ........................................................................53
Chapter 8 Trend (momentum) Trading Strategies ..................................................................................64
Chapter 9 Counter Trend (reversal) Trading Strategies.........................................................................95
Chapter 10 Stock Scanning & Building a Watch List............................................................................. 104
Chapter 11 Three Step Day Trading Plan....................................................................................................111
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................................115
Biography ..................................................................................................................................................................117
Dedication to Mom, Dad, Lisa and Lauren. Thank you for your love, support,
         and understanding. You keep me focused, driven, and happy.
              INTRODUCTION

Success as a day trader will only come to 10% of those who try. It's important to understand
why most traders fail so that you can avoid those mistakes. The day traders who lose money
in the market are losing because of a failure to either choose the right stocks, manage risk,
Ŕnd proper entries, or follow the rules of a proven strategy. In this book I will teach you
trading techniques that I personally use to proŔt from the market. Before diving into the
trading strategies we will Ŕrst build your foundation for success as a trader by discussing
the two most important skills you can possess. I like to say that a day trader is two things,
a hunter of volatility and a manager of risk. I'll explain how to Ŕnd predictable volatility and
how to manage your risk so you can make money and be right only 50% of the time. We
turn the tables by putting the odds for success in your favor. By picking up this book you
show dedication to improve your trading. This by itself sets you apart from the majority of
beginner traders.

The act of day trading is simply buying shares of a stock with the intention of selling those
shares for a proŔt, within minutes or hours. In order to proŔt in such a short window of time,
we trade shares of companies that have just released breaking news, made a big earnings
announcement or have any type of fundamental catalyst that results in above average interest
from retail traders and investors. The type of stocks a day trader will focus on are typically
much different from what a long term investor would look for. Day traders acknowledge the
high levels of risk associated with trading volatile markets, and they mitigate those risks by
holding positions for very short periods of time.

While investors typically look for 5-10% annual returns, day traders look for trades that
have the potential to make 5-10% intraday returns. However, in order to proŔt from intraday
moves, most day traders will take large positions which can result in a high level of single
stock exposure. Some will even engage in the high risk practice of trading on margin (money
borrowed from your broker). For example, a day trader with a $25k trading account may use
margin (buying power is 4x the cash balance) and trade as if he had $100k in equity. This
is considered leveraging your account. By aggressively trading on margin, if the trader can
produce 5% daily returns on the $100k buying power, the trader will grow the $25k initial
equity at a rate of 20% per day. The risk of course is that the trader will make a mistake that
can cost him everything. Unfortunately, this is the fate for 9 out of 10 traders. The cause of
these career ending mistakes result from a failure to manage risk.

Imagine a trader who has just taken 9 successful trades. In each trade there was a $50 risk
and $100 proŔt potential. This means each trade had the potential to double the risk for a
2:1 proŔt loss ratio. The Ŕrst 9 successful trades produce $900 in proŔt. On the 10th trade,
when the position is down $50, instead of accepting the loss, the untrained trader purchases
more shares at a lower price to reduce his cost basis. Once he is down $100, he continues
to hold and is unsure of whether to hold or sell. The trader Ŕnally takes the loss when he is
down $1k. This is a trader who has a 90% success rate, but is still a losing trader because he

                                                                  vii
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

failed to manage his risk. We will discuss in detail how to identify stocks and Ŕnd good trade
opportunities, but Ŕrst we will focus on developing your understanding of risk management.
Traders that don't utilize risk management techniques stand a good chance of being among
the 90% of retail traders who lose money in the market.

Over my years as a trader and as a trading coach, I have worked with thousands of students.
The majority of those students experienced a devastating loss at some point due to avoidable
mistakes. It is easy to understand how a trader can fall into the position of a margin call (a
debt to your broker). The money to trade on margin is easily available, and the allure of
quick proŔts can lead both new and seasoned traders to ignore commonly accepted rules
of risk management. The 10% of traders who consistently proŔt from the market share one
common skill. They cap their losses. They accept that each trade has a predetermined level of
risk and they adhere to the rules they set for that trade. This is part of a well-deŔned trading
strategy. It's common for an untrained trader to adjust their risk parameters mid-trade to
accommodate a losing position. For instance, if they said their stop loss is at -$50, and the
trade goes down to -$60, they might say they'll hold for just a few more minutes to see if it
comes back up. Before you know it, they are looking at an $80-100 loss, or worse, and they
are wondering how it happened. I'll admit that it's extremely difŔcult to achieve the level
of discipline to sell when you hit your max loss on a trade. Nobody wants to lose, but the
best traders are great losers. They accept their losses with grace and move on to the next
trade. They never allow one trade the ability to destroy their account or their career. This
characteristic will keep them in business as a day trader for a long time.

The skill to take losses and not allow them to cause you to lose focus is an act of mindfulness.
Our human emotions often work against us while we are in trades. The emotions of fear
and greed are present in every trader. The successful traders are able to experience those
emotions without acting on them. When you allow emotions to overtake your rational
thought process, you run the risk of over trading, exposing yourself to unnecessary risk, and
unplanned losses. It takes years of emotional conditioning to be able to sit for eight hours
watching the computer screens while maintaining composure the whole time. For new traders,
we encourage starting with shorter blocks of time and maintaining a constant focus on the
idea of thinking like a risk manager.

                                 Buying Long or Selling Short

If you are new to trading you may not be familiar with the concept of selling short. Traders
who sell short are borrowing shares from their broker to sell those shares at a high price, with
the intention of buying the shares back at a lower price, and proŔting from the drop. When
you sell short, your account will show in your open positions window, a negative position
(e.g. -1000 shares). You have borrowed 1000 shares from your broker and sold them. The
broker expects that you will buy back those shares. When you buy back those shares, it is
called covering your position. Some traders have a short bias and prefer to trade as stocks
drop. One of the risks with short selling is that if the stock goes up, you will eventually be

                                                                  viii
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

forced to cover your position. Since theoretically prices can climb inŔnitely, a trader could
experience an inŔnite loss if they do not cover their open short position.

Conversely, when you buy stock to the long side, your maximum loss is capped to the amount
of shares you purchased. The worst case scenario is the stock goes to $0. With a short
position, if you short 1000 shares of a stock at $5.00, and it goes up to $100.00, your $5k
position becomes a $95k loss. Throughout this book, we will discuss examples of momentum
trades that involve buying stock to the long side, but these patterns could be equally applied
to the inverse pattern in order to short stocks.

Whether you are a short seller or a long biased trader, it is important to know about the Short
Sale Restriction (SSR). This was designed to reduce downward volatility and help prevent
potential stock crashes. When Short Sale Restriction has been activated on a stock, you can
only short the stock when the price is moving up. This prevents people fueling a crash by
shorting as the price is dropping. SSR is turned on when a stock drops more than 10% in
price versus the previous days close. The SSR is an example of an indicator that tells us the
markets have a built in bias for trading to the long side. There is no such thing as a long buy
restriction. A stock can surge up 100% and you can continue to buy as it surges. This is one
of the reasons I prefer to be a long biased trader.

It's also important to note that shorting is not available for all stocks. The ability to short a
stock requires your broker to have shares available to borrow. If they have a small inventory,
you may not be able to short that stock.

                                       What you will learn

If you have tried day trading or watched somebody else day trade, you already know the
concepts are simple, but being successful at day trading is like walking a tightrope. If you watch
somebody doing it they make it look easy, but when you try it, it seems nearly impossible.
This is the experience most new day traders will go through. In fact, it's the same experience
I went through when I was learning to trade. I have found that the best trades are the ones
that have the most obvious setups and start to work in our favor almost immediately. If I Ŕnd
myself in the position of holding trades that aren't performing or I start trying to force trades
to work under less than ideal setups, I usually get into trouble. I'd encourage traders to focus
on the obvious setups we teach rather than overcomplicating things.

In this book we will teach you the fundamental concepts required for day trading. You will
learn how to manage risk, how to choose stocks worth trading, how to identify potential
setups, how to enter and exit trades, and how to manage your emotions while you are
trading. By taking the time to educate yourself, you are already proving a willingness to
learn, and that puts you ahead of the majority of new traders. Most new traders will trade
unproven strategies and then wonder why they are losing money. While you are in training,
it is important that you only trade in a simulated account. You have to practice the strategies
we teach and work on building your skills before ever trading in a live account. In our live
trading courses, we review the performance of all our students to ensure they are meeting the

                                                                   ix
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
metrics and statistics of a proŔtable trader. This means we evaluate accuracy rates, average
losses versus average winners, how much risk they take in their trades and how they behave
under stress of difŔcult markets or losing positions. Once students have proven they can be
proŔtable in a simulated environment, they will be ready to switch to live trading with strict
size and risk restrictions. Students in our live day trading chat room beneŔt from being able
to trade side by side with me, and hundreds of other professional traders. We have trained
the students in our community to be the best possible traders, thus increasing the overall
skill of our trading group.

                                                                   x
                                CHAPTER 1

     WHY DO MOST TRADERS FAIL?

If you are considering a career as a day trader, you cannot ignore the statistics that show only
1 in 10 traders will be able to make a living at it. I am not saying this to discourage you from
trading. We are going to talk about the reasons why most traders fail so you can avoid making
those same mistakes. I believe failure is an option, one that is often chosen without the trader
realizing it. Just as failure is an option, so is success, if you make the right decisions. Most traders
that I have seen fail were unable to follow simple rules of risk management. We will be discussing
the rules of risk management in the next chapter, but let us Ŕrst talk about the reason why it is
so difŔcult to follow the rules. Trading becomes extremely emotional when we are faced with
losses and even wins. Being a day trader puts you in the unique position of having to experience
a Ŕnancial loss every single day. On a good day, you will win more than you lose and end the day
with a net proŔt. But, even on the best days there will still typically be at least a few losing trades.
There is no such thing as a strategy or a trader who is 100% successful on every trade they take.
The best traders may be proŔtable every month out of the year, but it would be unreasonable
and statistically improbable to expect 100% accuracy. Even investors who make billions of dollars
have losing investments. This means you will have to face loss and become comfortable with it.
The traders I have known who have failed were never able to cope with loss. They allowed the
fear of loss to guide their trading decisions.

                                  The hunt for the Holy Grail

If you are a trader who is constantly jumping from strategy to strategy or technical indicator to
technical indicator, you may be suffering from the Holy Grail syndrome. These traders will spend
tremendous amounts of time and energy searching for the perfect combination of indicators
and strategies that will always give them winning trades. On the surface, it makes sense to search
for the best strategy, but that's not the motivation of these traders. Just below the surface is a
deep fear of loss. It is a fear so strong that it motivates these traders to search endlessly for that
perfect strategy in hopes of preventing them from having to experience any more losses. These
traders sometimes work to create automated trading systems, search out other traders they can
mirror trade (following trade for trade), or simply jump from strategy to strategy until they have
exhausted their Ŕnancial resources and give up. If you are in the group of traders hunting for the
Holy Grail, I would encourage you to read this carefully: you can lose 50% of the time and still
make money just as easily as you can be right 90% of the time and still lose money. You have to
focus not on your percentage of success, but on your proŔt loss ratios.

                                                                   1
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

                                         ProŔt Loss Ratios

ProŔt loss ratios are often overlooked by novice traders. We have our students trading with a
minimum 2:1 proŔt loss ratio (every trade has the proŔt potential of 2x the risk). With a 2:1 proŔt
loss ratio, our students can make money and be proŔtable with only 50% success rate. When
I work with students, the Ŕrst thing I look at is their trade history. I want to know their proŔt
loss ratios and their average percentage of success. These numbers will tell me if they have a
sustainable strategy. If you can trade with a 2:1 proŔt loss ratio, it becomes much easier for you
to succeed. Most traders who fail will be trading with negative proŔt loss ratios. Meaning they
lose more on average than they win. Regardless of their percentage of success, they will have set
the bar so high, it becomes almost impossible to succeed. The odds are stacked against them.
From a purely statistical standpoint, a negative proŔt loss ratio of 1:2 (you lose 2x what you
win on average) is an unsustainable strategy unless you maintain 75% success rate. After years
of trading, I can assure you that maintaining a 75% success is not easy. Often times the failed
traders will exit the market having never realized they were destined for failure because they did
not learn about the proŔt loss ratios required in order to be proŔtable.

                                   ProŔt Loss Ratio Statistics

                  2:1 ProŔt Loss Ratio = 33% is your Break Even before commissions

                  1:1 ProŔt Loss Ratio = 50% is your Break Even before commissions

                  1:2 ProŔt Loss Ratio = 66% is your Break Even before commissions

                                     Fear of Loss in Trading

Fear is a natural emotion, but it's difŔcult when your job requires you to experience fear on a
regular basis. Many traders will experience fear in a number of ways. The most obvious is the
fear of Ŕnancial loss. We acknowledge that investing in the market and day trading in particular
is high risk, but when we are faced with the decision to take a trade and expose ourselves to a
potential loss, fear can begin to guide our decisions. A less obvious form of fear is the fear of
missing a big move in the markets. If you suddenly see a stock start to jump up on what might
appear to be breaking news, or you see a reversal begin to take shape, you may feel inclined
to jump into the market out of fear of missing a potential winner. The fear has guided your
decision and led you into an unplanned trade. You may have purchased at a price too far away
from your stop or taken more shares than your risk tolerance allows. In a split second you made
a decision and broke your rules. The result when these trades go badly will be a larger loss than
your strategy and rules allow for. When I speak with a trader about a massive loss, they often say
"it happened so fast." They made a quick decision and it was the wrong decision. In reviewing
my own trading performance, my biggest losses were spontaneous trades I jumped into on an
impulse. I see the markets starting to move and jump into a stock without fully analyzing my
risk. Unfortunately, when emotions are guiding a trader's decisions, big mistakes are common.

                                                                   2
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

We will discuss techniques for managing emotions while trading, but Ŕrst let's review a few other
examples of erratic trading brought on by emotions.

                                   Holding Losers Too Long

As you can see, our fear of loss in trading can manifest itself in some unusual and outright
counterproductive ways. Many beginner traders and most failed traders will experience the
tendency to hold their losers too long and sell their winners too soon. The driving emotion that
leads to this behavior is a fear of loss. Why does a trader hold losers too long? It is because a
trade is not a loss until you have hit the sell button. There is always the chance that the price
could pop back up until you hit the sell button. The fear of making the loss real keeps you in the
trade because it makes you think about Ŕnding a way to turn the trade around instead of just
taking the loss and moving on to a different trade. The reality is that small losses are not a big
deal, but a trader in an emotional state does not think that way. Sometimes traders will make a
bad trade worse by averaging down, adding shares at a lower price to reduce their cost basis.
This typically results in bigger losses when it is not part of a proven strategy that involves scaling
in and out of trades by averaging. I have worked with traders who set $200 max losses, and on a
trade when they were down $200, instead of simply cutting the loss, they decided to add more
shares so they could trade out of the loss. These trades would often end in losses of -$1000 or
more. In hindsight, it is easy to say the right thing to do was simply cut the loss at -$200 and
follow the rules you made for yourself. Unfortunately, in the heat of the moment, emotions take
control and your rational thought processes get thrown out the window. In those cases, the fear
of loss actually resulted in the trader taking bigger losses than the rules of trading would allow
for. This is the exact opposite of what you want! The most important skill for a new trader to
understand and adopt is the ability to cap their losses.

                                   Selling Winners Too Soon

If you enter a trade that had a good proŔt potential and it Ŕt into your trading strategy, the last
thing you want to do is sell the trade before it has had a chance to work. If you are up 10 cents
on a trade that has the potential to make 50 cents, there is no reason to sell it. Why do so many
traders sell their winners too soon? It is because the fear of loss has guided their decisions. It
is the fear of the small winner turning into a loser that convinces us to sell the trade too soon.
Just as a loser isn't real until you hit the sell button, a winner isn't real until you've hit the sell
button and locked it up. In the short term we feel happy to have locked up some proŔt, even
if only a small one, but the big picture is that you are forming a habit of capping your winners.
To be a successful trader you have to cap your losers and let your winners run. You will want
that occasional big winner, because those will tide you over during periods of slow trading. A
trader that sells winners too soon and holds losers too long has the habits of a failing trader.
To avoid failure these traders must address how their emotions are inÁuencing their trading.
Instead of selling the full position when sitting on a small proŔt, I combat that urge by selling
a partial position and adjusting my stop. This means I will walk away with a small proŔt (not a
loss), but still have a position in the trade to let it realize its full potential. This is called scaling
out. Scaling out is a great trade management method of keeping partial positions with a good

                                                                   3
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

cost average. To maintain discipline, I refuse to sell my Ŕnal position until I get stopped out by
a valid exit indicator.

                          Embrace Loss as a Part of the Business

Instead trying to search for the Holy Grail, or give in to the urge to hold losers and sell winners,
we must simply accept loss as part of the business of day trading. We cannot Ŕght it. Every day
trader will experience losses. Becoming a good day trader means being a good loser. The trick
to being a good loser is learning to cap your losses at a set dollar amount and sticking with
it. The hard part is holding yourself to the rules. Day trading requires a tremendous amount
of discipline and self-control. It is a job that will challenge you in more ways than you would
imagine. In the example of the trader with a 90% success rate that was still losing money, he
failed to cap his losses. Being that type of trader is a choice. By teaching you about proŔt loss
ratios and the importance of capping your loses, we are empowering you to make the choice
to be a successful trader.

                                     Discipline as a Practice

In our trading courses, we spend a great deal of time working with students to help them improve
their discipline. Many of our students found us after taking other trading courses and Ŕnding
themselves still stuck in a cycle of poor trading habits, trading losses, and disappointment. We
realized that textbook concepts of trading, which are important and will be covered later on,
are not enough. Understanding fundamental concepts of trading on their own are not enough
to be a successful trader. You must also think and act like a successful trader. This means selling
losers quickly and holding partial positions in your winners as long as possible. In order to help
our students improve their ability to be disciplined, we require a min of 30 minutes of exercise
and 15 minutes of meditation every day. I use exercise and meditation to help train my mind to
cope with stress. By forcing myself to do these two things every day, I am practicing discipline. In
the moment when I am in a trade and need to make a hard decision, I need to be able to Ŕght
the urge to sell the winners too soon and hold the losers too long. By practicing discipline in
others areas of our life, we strengthen that muscle memory and improve our ability to maintain
composure while trading. Practicing discipline is a way of conditioning our minds to become
accustomed to a feeling of discomfort. Rather than taking steps to alleviate the feeling, we can
train ourselves to withstand it. When we sell a winner too soon or hold a loser too long, we are
allowing the uncomfortable emotion of fear to guide our decision. Most of the successful traders
I know have strict exercise regimens because it helps improve their trading performance. We
know it is impossible to block out the emotions such as fear, they will still surface within every
trader. However, the difference between winning traders and losing traders is that winning
traders will not subject their strategy to the emotion. They recognize the emotion and allow it
to exist without acting on those feelings. This is a critical step in the emotional development
of any trader. I would encourage you to begin journaling your emotions while trading. The Ŕrst
step to changing your behavior is becoming aware of your emotional patterns and their impact
on your trading performance. As we discussed earlier, you can have a deep understanding of
all the textbook concepts of trading, but still fail to succeed because you have not achieved

                                                                   4
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE
the emotional training to be a trader. We focus on providing our students with a well-rounded
education that includes both textbook and emotional development.
It is important to remember that discipline is not like learning to ride a bike or learning to swim.
Discipline is very much like a muscle that can be strengthened when exercised or atrophy when
ignored. Even after years of trading, I still Ŕnd myself occasionally giving in to my instinct to
chase a stock for fear of missing the move, to sell a winner too soon, or hold a loser a little too
long. Every day when I trade I have to Ŕght against my natural instincts. Unfortunately many
of our natural human instincts do not encourage healthy trading patterns. If I had to guess I
would say almost all successful traders have spent thousands of hours training their minds to
Ŕght against counterproductive impulses. I am sure there are some traders that have a natural
aptitude for the mindset required to be proŔtable, but I believe the majority of us have to
really work at it. It took me years to become successful, and looking back I have realized it was
because of the emotional obstacles that stood in my way. I had a great concept of stocks, chart
patterns, basic strategies, but I kept falling into the cycle of big losers and small winners. It took
a long time before I developed the self-awareness to realize what was causing those actions.
My hope is that by reading this, you will avoid the years of trial and error it took me to learn
these important lessons.

                                                                   5
                                CHAPTER 2

           RISK MANAGEMENT

One of the Ŕrst things I told you was that day traders are hunters of volume and managers of risk.
In this chapter we are going to discuss risk management. As an aspiring day trader, you already
understand that day trading is one of the riskiest investment techniques. The reason traders
choose to day trade instead of make more traditional, longer term investments is because day
trading can produce much larger gains in a faster time frame. Day trading is one of the fastest
ways to grow a small account, when it is done properly. The problem is most people will not
trade properly. Successful traders can utilize $25k accounts to produce over $50k per year, or
200% in returns. It would not be realistic, however, for a trader to utilize a $250 million account
to produce $500 million per year. The markets typically do not have the liquidity to support a
trader entering or exiting a multi-million dollar position within minutes, but positions of tens of
thousands or even hundreds of thousands of dollars can be executed almost immediately. This
allows day traders with accounts under $1 million and as low as $25,000, to utilize leverage and
high speed trading techniques to produce large percentage gains. When a trader reaches a point
where they are managing more money than they can efŔciently day trade, they would typically
begin to branch out by adding longer term investments to diversify the portfolio.

While understanding that day trading is one of the highest risk trading techniques, the potential
for a big reward captures our interest. We can acknowledge that within the realm of day trading,
there will be relatively higher risk day trading strategies and relatively lower risk day trading
strategies. Our goal is to develop a trading strategy to maximize proŔt potential while taking
steps to minimize risk. Every time you take a trade, you must evaluate the risk of the trade and
weigh that against the reward. Often times our judgment can be clouded by our emotional state
or previous trading experiences. If we recently experienced a loss, we may decide to take more
risk on the next trade to compensate for the previous loss. Or a more conservative trader may
decide to reduce position sizes or even skip good trade opportunities because the last time they
traded that setup they lost money. It takes a heightened level of self-awareness to recognize
when we are making clear risk reward decisions and when our judgment is clouded. This is a
skill that is learned over time. You can develop a sense of mindfulness by journaling while you
trade and then reviewing your notes after the market closes.

                                     Different Types of Risk

When we talk about risk there are a few different types of risk you need to understand. As day
traders we are primarily concerned about the distance between our entry and our stop (the price
where we will sell for a loss). Your stop loss should be based on a recent support or resistance
area on the chart and should always fall within your maximum dollar loss amount. The majority
of losses we experience will be when a trade drops down and hits the stop price.

                                                                   6
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

The second type of risk we have to be mindful of is the volatility in the market. As day traders we
love volatility, but it also presents a risk because extremely volatile markets can result in larger
losses than we may have originally planned for. Since we know that there is a spectrum of risk
in day trading, we choose to avoid day trading during moments of unpredictable volatility, such
as breaking news. When news is realized, individual stocks or the market at large can trade in a
very wide and volatile range. Instead of jumping into the market during that peak in volatility,
we wait for the dust to settle before determining a potential trade opportunity.

The third type of risk is your exposure risk. Exposure is calculated by multiplying the share price
by the number of shares you are holding. As an investor, you have to factor in exposure risk
since positions are held for a long time. An investor typically will not allocate more than 10%
of the portfolio to any single stock. In contrast, day traders who use leverage may experience
particularly high levels of exposure risk. While this level of risk has to be carefully monitored,
most day traders are able to mitigate that risk by holding shares for short periods of time.

                                             Stock Halts

A type of risk that can be a nightmare for day traders using large positions are stock halts. Trading
can be halted by the exchanges at any time. There are a number of different types of stock halts.
There are market wide stock halts which only occur when there is a technical glitch or some type
of computer errors in the exchange. These halts can last for a few minutes, hours or potentially
longer. These are rare. The more common stock halts are volatility halts and halts pending the
release of material news. Anytime a stock is halted, it can reopen at a much different price. The
risk is that a stock could reopen far below your maximum loss amount. We can take certain steps
to avoid halts by understanding what causes halts. The market has created what are called circuit
breaker halts. If a stock rises or falls more than 10% in a 5min period, the stock can be halted for
Ŕve minutes. This is a volatility pause to give traders a chance to get their bearings, analyze news,
and slow down. This is a measure to prevent Áash crash situations. In volatile markets, these types
of halts can be fairly common. Often times if some type of news about the company is leaked
it can result in a rapid move and then a volatility halt. When stocks are halted going up, they
often open higher. Conversely, when they are halted going down, they often open lower. When
stocks are halted pending news, it means the company is releasing signiŔcant, material news.
Once the news has been released, the stock will be scheduled to reopen. If the news is bad, the
stock can open signiŔcantly lower. This is one of the greatest risks in trading. Stocks susceptible
to being halted pending news include stocks surging up rapidly for no apparent reason. In these
cases it is not uncommon for the company to issue a statement regarding the price action, or to
address the rumors that may be causing the price action. Although stocks can be halted at any
time pending news, news is typically released when the market is closed.

Another type of stock halt which is common with penny stocks, but not as common with higher
priced stocks is a halt pending government investigation. This is typically the result of a stock
being used for market manipulation and fraud. Stocks halted pending an investigation can
remain halted for weeks or even months.

                                                                   7
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

As day traders, we have to be mindful of the potential for stock halts and limit our positions
on stocks that are at risk for being halted. High risk stocks include penny stock companies and
stocks trading on unconŔrmed news that has not been released by the company itself. Despite
our best efforts to avoid being caught in a halt, it can happen. This is one of the reasons trading
on margin can be so dangerous. In the event you are caught in a halt and the stock reopens
down 20%, if you were trading on margin, it could result in a massive loss or even a margin call
from your broker.

           A Day Traders Statistical Advantage (2:1 ProŔt Loss Ratios)

When I was a new trader, I would take extremely large positions without any real understanding
of the level of risk I was taking. I would enter trades without a predetermined max loss, and if the
trade went against me, I would become paralyzed by fear. I would be unable to think or make a
decision as I would watch the loss get bigger and bigger. The Ŕrst mistake was entering a trade
without Ŕrst outlining the risk versus the reward. As an example, I would often buy stocks as they
approached whole dollar levels. So I might buy 1000 shares of a stock at $8.90 with the target
of selling it at $9.10 for 20 cents proŔt. Unfortunately, when the stock would pullback, I would
often hold until it broke below the nearest half dollar of $8.50. In this example, I would be risking
40 cents to make 20 cents. This is a negative proŔt loss ratio which requires a 66% accuracy rate
in order to break even before commissions. This is not a sustainable ratio, especially for a new
trader. When I was a new trader I did not know anything about proŔt loss ratios, and I continued
to make these uneducated trades and then wonder why I was losing money. Using a 2:1 proŔt
loss ratio, my proper stop on that trade should have been $8.80 instead of $8.50. With a 10 cent
stop and a 20 cent proŔt target, I could justify taking that trade. That means my proper stop was
only 25% of the loss I was taking as an untrained trader. That's a huge difference! This meant
that by using proper risk management, I could potentially reduce my losses on those types of
trades by over 75%. It is extremely important to understand, regardless of your strategy or the
setups you trade, that every trade has the potential to double what you are risking. If you do not
have the potential to win twice as much you risk, you should not be taking the trade. By simply
understanding proŔt loss ratios and the huge statistical advantage of a 2:1 proŔt loss ratio, you
have set yourself ahead of the majority of new traders.

                                Data Mine Your Trade History

If you are not already tracking all of your trades in an excel document, I suggest you start doing
this now. The information you want to track is the type of setup, time, symbol, price, entry, exit,
amount made, amount lost and notes. I have been tracking all of my trades for years and have
the beneŔt of thousands and thousands of trades available for review. I can sort my data based
on the strategy, the proŔts or losses, or the time of day. I dig into the analytics of my trading
performance to get a deeper understanding of where I have strengths and where I need to make
adjustments. If for example you recognize that the majority of your proŔts are in the morning,
and your biggest losses are in the afternoon, you can begin to become more mindful during
afternoon trading. You can also keep track of your proŔt loss ratios on a monthly basis and always
work to improve your statistics. If you trade 500,000 shares per month and you can improve your

                                                                   8
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

average proŔts by 1 cent per share, it will increase your proŔts by $5,000 per month. This shows
you that very small adjustments in your statistics can result in huge differences at the end of the
month. This also highlights the tightrope traders must walk. The difference between success and
failure can be the matter of a slight adjustment in your ratios. The part of your proŔt loss ratio
that is easiest to control is your max loss.

                    Capping your Losses - Be good at being wrong

When I speak with a trader who recently experienced a large loss, I like to spend time reviewing
the trade that resulted in the loss. I always begin by asking the trader what their risk was when
they entered the trade. Rarely does a beginner trader enter a position intending to risk as much
as they ultimately lose. That is the Ŕrst mistake. Every time we take a trade, we must know how
much we are risking. This means understanding the logical place to sell the stock for a loss if
the trend or the setup fails. Before getting into the chart patterns and the deŔnitions of exit
indicators, we will Ŕrst say that we stop out of all trades when they hit our max loss. Unfortunately,
many traders enter position without a max loss in mind.

Every trading plan should have a max loss per trade and a max loss per day. We recommend
students set their daily max loss at their daily proŔt target. When they have a $200 daily proŔt
target, if they are down $200 on the day they shut down their computer and walk away. Although
it is difŔcult to accept defeat, it is far more important to realize that once you have exceeded
your max loss, your judgment is almost guaranteed to become compromised. It is always best
to walk away instead of attempting to trade in a compromised emotional state. Just as we have
a max loss per day, we also have a max loss per trade. I typically set my max loss at about 25%
of my daily goal. If I take a trade and the market suddenly turns against me, I take the loss. Over
the years of working with students, I have found that some students are very good at taking
their losses, while others struggle to press the sell button. Some even turn short term day trades
into long swing trades. If you are in the group of traders who frequently Ŕnd themselves down
beyond your pre-determined max loss, I would consider setting automatic stop orders with
your broker. If the price falls below the stop price, your order will automatically execute and you
avoid having to press the sell button yourself. Even though it can be difŔcult to hand over this
aspect of trade management to the computer, it is sometimes the best technique for students
who struggle to take the losses early. When you are trading, it is important to remind yourself
that regardless of how you traded last week or last month, today is your opportunity to prove
to yourself that you can follow rules and stick to your trading plan. If you want to succeed as a
trader, it is paramount that you are able to hold yourself to the rules of max loss per trade and
max loss per day. Ultimately, this means walking away from the computer when you hit your
max loss for the day, even if it is difŔcult.

Day trading is a career where you can make a catastrophic mistake, and then keep trading
moments later. You could take a 30,000 share position, lose $15,000, and then do it again Ŕve
more times in a row. In just one day and a handful of trades, you could easily blow up your entire
account. This type of event is the result of emotionally fueled trading. By forcing yourself to walk
away after hitting your max loss, you can avoid the temptation to fall into a cycle of increasing

                                                                   9
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

your risk and trying to make back your losses. In other careers, race car driving for instance,
if you crash your car into the wall you are done with the race and have to wait until the next
race. The very nature of that type of job gives you a period of time to reÁect on the mistakes
you made that resulted in the accident. Day trading does not come with these built-in time out
periods after we make a mistake. We have to build them into our trading plan because they are
extremely important for our emotional development as a trader. They are what prevent us from
making mistakes when we are in a heightened emotional state.

                                       Balancing your Risk

If you take 10 trades in a day, and you risk $100 on the Ŕrst nine trades and then risk $1,000 on
the 10th trade, it doesn't matter if you have a 90% success rate when you lose on the last trade.
You will be a losing trader. This is an element of risk management called balancing risk. You never
want to have one trade weighted so heavily with risk that it has the power to erase previous
winners. Even if the Ŕnal trade had the 2:1 proŔt loss potential (risking $1,000 to make $2,000),
it is a poor decision because the risk of that one trade far outweighs your average risk per trade.
Many traders, including myself, will adjust our risk per trade throughout the day based on our
performance and to adapt to greater market conditions. This is a common practice used to
increase proŔts on days when trading is good and reduce losses on days when trading is difŔcult.
The difference is that I am adjusting risk in smaller increments, so the impacts of winners or losers
will not have a strong effect on my overall performance. If I risk $100 on the Ŕrst six trades, I
may decide to increase risk to $150 or decrease risk to $75 on seventh, but I would not make a
drastic change to my risk parameters in the middle of a trading day. Many beginner traders will
have a great day until they decide to swing for the fences and take a high risk position on what
they think is a perfect setup. If they lose on that high risk trade, they will give back their entire
proŔts from the day and potentially go into the red. This is a disappointing Ŕnancial loss, but what
is even worse is the loss of conŔdence and the impact that it has on your emotions. This is the
type of behavior that can quickly cause a trader to fall into a cycle of emotionally fueled trading
known as revenge trading. Trying to quickly make back the losses by taking increasingly risky
trades. To avoid this situation entirely, a trader must balance their risk across all trades, so if that
Ŕnal trade is a loser, it does not ruin their day or their psychological control over future trades.

              Gamblers think about ProŔts, Traders think about Risk

The stock market is a place where all different personalities come together to trade. You will Ŕnd
long term investors, institutional investors, activist investors, retail traders, and you will also Ŕnd
gamblers. Unfortunately, day trading has a negative connotation to some who consider it the
equivalent to gambling. Any full-time trader understands that that is far from reality. A trader
makes decisions based on a strategy that has historical data to support it. The only way to make
a career out of trading is to understand your risk on every trade and to follow the rules of your
trading plan. But, there will always be those who simply gamble with their trading accounts
by taking reckless positions in the search of huge proŔts. If you want to gamble, you might as
well go to a casino. The odds of having a lucky trade and making a fortune in the stock market
are extremely slim. You cannot base your strategy or your career on luck. Greed is a powerful

                                                                  10
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

emotion that, a lot like fear, can allow you to throw out your rational thought processes. If you
ever Ŕnd yourself feeling that emotion of greed kicking in, it is a good time to turn off your
platform and walk away. Since we are trading with and against the best traders in the world, if
we are not able to trade at our peak performance levels, we should not be trading.

                                Add to Winners not to Losers

Although there are many traders and investors that utilize a strategy of scaling in, adding shares
at various prices to get a good cost basis, I avoid adding to stocks that are below my entry price
for day trades. If I purchase a stock at $10.00 and it drops to $9.50, I could double my position
and adjust my cost basis to $9.75, but then I am adding to a losing position. If it drops to $9.25,
I will experience a loss double than the initial loss if I had simply sold at $9.50. In all my years
of trading, I have found the best trades work almost immediately. Occasionally, I will get into
a trade and it will nearly touch my stop and then turn around and end up being a winner, but
more often, those trades turn into losers. Instead of adding to a losing trade, I prefer to cut the
loss and move on to the next opportunity. When you focus on adding to losers, you risk making
the loss bigger and you miss the opportunity to Ŕnd a better setup.

In contrast, if I buy a stock at $10.00 and it goes up to $10.50, I may double my position and
have a new cost basis of $10.25. If the stock surges up to $10.75 or $11.00 I'll make more with
the increased position, and if it the stock drops back down to $10.25 or $10.00, I can sell for
breakeven or for a small loss. Adding to winning trades gives you the potential to have big
winners, while adding to losers gives you the potential for big losses. Since we want to focus on
capping our losses, we need to avoid adding to losers.

                         Stock Picking versus Risk Management

This is a good time to remind you that you can be a proŔtable trader with an accuracy rate of
50% or less, as long as you have a good proŔt loss ratio. Being proŔtable is not about being right
on every trade, it's about capping your losses and taking trades that provide the opportunity
for winners that will exceed the losers. Early on I made the example of the trader who loses
money despite a 90% success rate. This trader may be a great stock picker, but his lack of risk
management results in a losing strategy. Picking good stocks is important, but clearly it is not
as important as managing your risk on every trade. I say this to remind you to focus Ŕrst and
foremost on your risk and your max loss on each trade. In the next chapter, we will discuss stock
selection as an extension of risk management. By trading the right stocks, we can improve our
likelihood for success especially when we combine risk management techniques.

                                                                  11
                                CHAPTER 3

    STOCK SELECTION - CHOOSING
     THE RIGHT STOCKS TO TRADE

In the last chapter we talked about the importance of risk management. We will continue to touch
back on the theme of risk management and emotional conditioning throughout this chapter.
By trading only the strongest stocks and applying the principles of good risk management,
we can give ourselves a huge statistical advantage for success. There are thousands of stocks
available to trade each day, but only a few that are actually good candidates for day trading.
There are so many that a new trader can quickly become overwhelmed. Often, new traders
refer to a watch list of companies they are familiar with. While this may be suitable for some
longer term investment strategies, it is not appropriate for day trading. For day trading, there
are usually only a small handful of stocks each day that I would consider the right stocks to
trade. We have a very speciŔc list of requirements for what makes a stock worth trading on any
given day. Most day traders will trade hundreds of different stocks each month, rarely trading
the same stocks for more than a few days at a time. The reason we trade so many different
stocks is because we are only interested in stocks with volatility and heavy trading volume.
Stocks trade on heavy volume because they have a high level of retail interest. High levels
of retail interest are typically driven by news, but are sometimes driven by stocks trading at
extreme highs or lows. If you look at almost any chart, you will see a few days where the stock
traded on extremely high relative volume. Those days are often accompanied by a big gap
on the chart. Those are the days we would be most interested in trading that stock. I often
remind our students that on any given day, there is a stock having a once in a year event. As a
day trader, we have to be willing to jump from stock to stock in order to Ŕnd the type of price
action that can result in at least 5-10% intraday moves.

                                                                  12
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                 Chart of a stock showing the days with big volume. Those were
                            the days this was a stock in play for day traders.

                                   Stocks must have Volume

As day traders, we look for stocks that are trading on above average volume. On any given
day, algorithmic trading computers account for more than half of the volume in the market. If
we see a stock that is trading on below average volume, it is safe to assume that day traders
have very little interest in that stock and that the majority of the volume is controlled by high
frequency trading computers. These trading computers will buy and sell shares which will result

                                                                  13
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

in volume and chart patterns. The problem for day traders is, that when we look at these charts
and recognize a familiar pattern, we can be fooled into thinking it is a good buying opportunity.
A good looking setup is never complete without above average volume. We need above average
volume to conŔrm that thousands of other traders are watching this same chart. When we are
watching a setup forming and we expect a breakout to the upside, that breakout is the result
of thousands of traders all buying up shares. In fact, we are one of those buyers! That means as
day traders we should only trade stocks other people are trading.

There are a few techniques for making sure we are trading the right stocks. The most obvious
technique is to simply look at the daily volume. If a stock trades an average of 500k shares per
day and has already traded 2 million shares, there is above average interest. The other option is
to use stock scanning software to scan for stocks with high relative volume. The relative volume
for the day is translated into a number, a ratio. `1' is average and `2' being 2x average. Stocks can
trade on any multiple of relative volume, so anything above a `2' is interesting.

                                     The Hunt for a Catalyst

Every morning starts the same way for me. I look at the stocks trading on heavy volume in the
pre-market session. This is often an indicator of early retail interest that will carry over into the
trading day. I review each of the stocks trading on high volume to see if there is a catalyst. A
biotech or pharmaceutical stock that has just released results from a clinical study could be
interesting, or a stock that just reported a big earnings release would be worth watching. I don't
put a tremendous amount of energy into researching the catalyst beyond conŔrming there is
a reason that the stock is moving up or down. Even the best news releases sometimes result in
poor price action, so I remind myself to always follow the chart and not the fundamentals of
the catalyst. Investors focus on fundamentals, but traders focus on chart patterns and technical
analysis. We have to remember that we are traders and keep our attention on the chart patterns
at all times.

When I'm reviewing pre-market leaders, it is important to check for buy outs. When a stock has
been bought out overnight it will trade the next morning at the new price, and typically there
will be a huge amount of volume as people buy and sell shares they have been holding. The
problem is that since the stock has been bought out, the value of the stock has been determined.
If a buyout is priced at 4.00 for example, the stock will trade almost exactly at 4.00 all day long.
There is no reason to short the stock or buy the stock knowing the value of the company has
become Ŕxed at 4.00. The reason these stocks trade on high relative volume is because long term
investors sell their positions at the buyout price. Anytime we see a buy out on the gap scanner
we disregard it and move on to the next stock.

                                                                  14
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                             Chart of a stock that has just been bought out.
When we are reviewing the news for a stock, it is important to think about the quality of the source.
News released directly from the company, a competing company, majority shareholders, top tier
analyst Ŕrms or government agencies will typically be the strongest. This will include earnings
results, sales contracts, buyout offers, stock buyback programs, FDA approvals, government
investigations, patent approvals, etc. News released from unknown analysts or unconŔrmed
sources should always be considered suspect.

                                                                  15
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

     Chart of a Former Runner, a stock known to make huge moves when it has news.

                                          Former Runners

It is important to be familiar with former runners. A former runner is a stock that has made huge
intraday moves in the past, or has made parabolic moves on the daily chart. These are stocks that
made moves in excess of 100% over a few days. If we notice a former runner reporting news, it
is worth keeping a close eye on it. We already know the stock has the potential for home run
type breakouts, so it is possible we could see that type of move again under the right conditions.
Former runners will typically have all the characteristics of a good stock. They will have that
perfect combination of a low Áoat and strong breaking news.

                                                                  16
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                        Chart of Low Float Stock moving 10,000% in 3 weeks.

                                         Low Float Stocks

All stocks have a Áoat. The Áoat is the number of outstanding shares available to trade on the
open market, not including shares held by insiders and the company. The Áoat is the supply.
When a stock makes its initial public offering (IPO), they release a set number of shares into the
market. This becomes the Áoat. At any time, a company can begin a stock buyback program to
repurchase the shares on the open market. The result of a buyback program will be a decrease

                                                                  17
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
in Áoat and typically, an increase in share price. Alternatively, a company can increase their Áoat
by selling more shares on the open market through offerings. Selling more shares will increase
the Áoat and decrease the value of the shares. Secondary offerings are a form of dilution used
for the purpose of raising more capital for the company. This is where the concept of supply and
demand in the markets comes from.
Day traders will always want to be aware of the Áoat size of the stocks they trade. If a stock has
a great catalyst and a very low Áoat, the supply and demand effect can cause 100% intraday
moves. In contrast, a stock that has a very large Áoat is unlikely to result in more than a 10%
intraday move, even with the best news. By understanding the Áoat, we can recognize the
potential of a stock. Whether we are looking at a pre-market runner or reviewing a stock that
just popped up on a scanner mid-day, the Áoat is always going to be one of the Ŕrst things
we check. As day traders, we hunt for volatility, which means we prefer to trade lower Áoat
stocks. Investors looking for less volatility and less risk may look for companies with a larger
Áoat. This again highlights the unique skill set required for different market participants.
I prefer to trade momentum stocks with a Áoat of under 50 million shares. Stocks with a Áoat
of under 10 million shares will produce some of the biggest percentage gainers. There are
days when a stock with a 5 million share Áoat will trade more than 20 million shares. That
means the entire number of outstanding shares has changed hands four different times. When
stocks trade the entire Áoat of available shares, it is commonly known as Áoat rotation. When
we see stocks that move 100%-200% intraday, they will almost always experience at least one
full Áoat rotation.
When I trade reversals, I will trade any Áoat. A reversal setup that has a great 5min chart with
a strong daily chart can be a good candidate regardless of the Áoat. The target on these
types of trades will typically be a move back towards the open price. Stocks with a Áoat of
more than 500 million shares will typically be less volatile and less interesting for most day
traders.

                                                                  18
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

      Chart of a several follow through days. This is when momentum continues over
   several days. A follow through day is when a candle breaks the previous days high.

                           Follow Through Days / Continuation

When I review the stocks gapping up each morning, I also take note of stocks that were
extremely active in the previous trading day. Sometimes these stocks will have the potential to
carry over momentum from the previous day. Multi-day runners are common among stocks
that have released really good news and also have strong daily charts. The important price level
to watch is the previous days high and low. I only trade when the prices make a fresh breakout
versus the previous days high. Typically, the fresh breakout will bring in a new set of buyers and

                                                                  19
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
force short sellers to cover their open positions. For this reason, I keep follow through stocks on
close watch for a potential breakout.

                         Chart of an inside day. The inside day was the small
                                  green candle after the large red candle.
                                                                  20
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                                             Inside Days

In contrast to follow through days where we look for continued momentum and a fresh breakout, an
inside day is when a stock trades completely inside the previous days high and low. I avoid trading a
stock on an inside day because there is no reason to expect signiŔcant momentum or price action.
Inside days will often follow days of big volatility. Sometimes, stocks are able to break out over the
previous days range and form a follow through, but until that happens, I stay on the sidelines.

                    A stock chart showing the power of breaking mid-day news
                  that created a 20 point move. The stock retraces to its moving

                        averages before Ŕnding support and moving back up.
                                                                  21
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

                           Breaking News & Intraday Extremes

In addition to extreme stocks that are former runners or have low Áoats, there are also going to
be stocks that become irrationally weak or strong in the middle of the day. The midday strength
or weakness can sometimes be attributed to breaking news. When news breaks in the middle of
the day, it can cause a stock to spike up so rapidly that shares will be halted by a volatility halt. A
stock spiking 10% in Ŕve minute can trigger these halts. It is not uncommon to see a stock spike
up and get halted after a press release. These stocks are experiencing an intraday extreme, and
if they are also trading on high relative volume, they become a stock worth watching for a trade.
We will apply one of our trading strategies, covered later in this book, to these breaking news
setups. In addition to stocks surging on breaking news, we also have stocks that will begin to
trade at intraday extremes for no apparent reason. As long as these stocks are trading on high
relative volume, they become a stock in play, even if we do not have an obvious catalyst. We
would prefer to trade stocks with a clear catalyst, but since we know the market can be irrational,
we do not want to discount any stock that is moving with sufŔcient volume.

                          Stocks Selection as Risk Management

Trading the right stocks can help reduce your risk as a trader. The majority of stocks in the market
are not suitable for day trading on any given day. As day traders, we are only interested in the
highly active stocks each day. This means we must be quick to adapt to changing markets. Some
months we trade pharmaceutical stocks while other months we trade technology stocks. The
market is constantly changing, but we can rest assured that every day there will be a stock trading
on heavy volume due to news. Regardless of bearish markets or bullish markets, there will always
be volatility in the market and that will keep day traders in business. As hunters of volatility, we
begin each day with a review of the pre-market movers and continue through the day with a
sharp eye for stocks coming in and out of play. As you continue reading, you will begin to learn
about trading chart patterns on the right stocks while applying good risk management principles.

                                                                  22
                                CHAPTER 4

  INTRODUCTION TO CANDLESTICKS

As day traders, we spend the majority of our time looking at intraday stock charts, but it's
important to remember that every stock is trading in the context of its daily chart. This means
that although we will take trades based on intraday chart patterns, we will always keep an eye on
potential support and resistance levels on the daily chart. In this chapter, we will work through
setting up your basic stock charts and teach the basic chart patterns we look for on daily charts,
with an emphasis on support and resistance levels. Later, we will dive into the intraday patterns.
A stock chart is a visual representation of the price history of a stock. Stock charts provide us
with a context so we can understand the current price of a stock relative to previous prices. The
most commonly used charts for day traders are candlestick charts. If you are looking at a daily
chart that includes the last 90 days, you will see 90 candlesticks. On a daily chart, each candlestick
represents one day of trading, while on a 1min chart, each candlestick represents one minute of
trading. Charts can be set in almost any time frame a trader desires, but the most common time
frames are daily charts, 60min charts, 15min charts, 5min charts, and 1min charts. I personally
use a daily chart, 5min, and 1min chart to Ŕnd my entries.

                                                                  23
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
A single candlestick provides us with four pieces of information about the price action of a stock
within that time frame. The four pieces of information we learn from a candle stick are the high
of the period, the low of the period, the open of the period, and the close of the period. The
center of the candle is called the real body, and the lines that go up to the high and down to the
low are called the upper and lower candle wicks, or shadows. In addition to the four data points,
we can also draw conclusions about the market sentiment based on the shape of the candle.
Multiple candlesticks lined up together can begin to form familiar chart patterns, including Áags
and wedges.

                                          Image of a Doji Candlestick.

                                         Doji Candlesticks

A doji candlestick has a very small candle body, meaning the open price and the close price are
nearly the same. We can infer from this candlestick shape that there is a momentary standoff
between buyers and sellers. If the candle occurs on heavy volume it tells us there is a battle at
that price. Sometimes a doji will also have a long upper or lower candle wick. This tells us the price
suddenly moved up or down, but quickly returned to the same price as the open. The means
the move was not sustained. In general, doji candles represent some degree of indecision in the
market. When a doji candle occurs at the top of a very strong move of 5-10 green candles, the
indecision reÁected in the candle shape can signify a potential reversal. Doji's that occur during a
period of sideways consolidation are less important to us because sideways price action already
reÁects indecision.

                                                                  24
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

Image of a Topping Tail candle. Bottoming Tails are the inverse candle in a downtrend.

                             Bottoming Tails and Topping Tails

Candles at the top or bottom of a long trend that have long upper or long lower wicks are
considered topping tail or bottoming tail candles. They can signify a potential reversal. The
shape of the candle indicates a continuation of the trend, followed by a quick reversal with a
close around the middle or low of the candle's range. A doji candle that has long upper or lower
wicks is one of my favorite indicators of a potential reversal. I rely on these candlestick patterns
for timing my counter trend entries.

                                                                  25
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

                         Image of Hammer Candle (inverted hammers occur
                                    after uptrend and are upside down).

                             Hammers and Inverted Hammers

Like bottoming tails and dojis, a hammer candle really only has signiŔcance when it occurs in
the context of a long downtrend. Hammer candles will always have small bodies and long lower
wicks that are larger than the bodies. It is often said that a hammer candle at the bottom of a
downtrend is hammering out a new base. The long bottom wick indicates a selloff in that period
where the buyers quickly took the opportunity to jump in and push prices back up. This does
not always mean the trend will reverse, conŔrmation of the reversal will come when the next
candle breaks the high of the hammer. This is called a candle over candle conŔrmation. We will
discuss the entry and exit indicators in detail a bit later.
An inverted hammer only carries signiŔcance when it occurs at the end of a long uptrend. The
inverted hammer will have a long topping tail and a small real body. The long topping tail
indicates a surge of buying that was quickly reversed. This suggests indecision and a battle
between buyers and sellers that was won by the sellers. When we are watching stocks trading
in real-time, we can see the formation of the candle wicks. They often appear as a Ŕnal burst of
volume and then a quick and powerful snap back up as the reversal begins.

                                                                  26
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                                       Long Body Candles

The Ŕnal candle stick shape we will discuss are long body candles. A long body candle that is
green, opens and surges up without ever going down. These candles close at the high and are
indicative of extreme bullish sentiment. As day traders, we always want to be holding a stock
while a long body candle is forming, but we never want to buy after a long body candle. If we
buy at the top of a long body candle we are chasing a large move. Instead, we need to wait for
a pullback opportunity if we want to trade with the trend, or wait for a reversal indicator if we
want to short the stock.
A red long body candle shows extreme bearish sentiment as the candle opens and sells off for
the entire candlestick period. If we are in a short position during the formation of a long body
candle, we may want to consider covering part of our position into the Áush to the downside.
After a series of several long body candles in a row, there is a high likelihood of a bounce.
Anytime I miss a move, whether to the upside or the downside, I wait for a good reversal
indicator. We will discuss the counter trend trading strategies later in this book, but if you can
picture three red long body candles in a row that end with a bottoming tail candle, that is the
type of reversal pattern we are going to be hunting for. If that bottoming tail also coincides with
a daily support level, we may feel conŔdent taking a candle over candle entry on the Ŕrst candle
to make a new high following the selloff.

                                                                  27
                                        ROSS CAMERON

Image of Long Body Candles (these candles can be either red or green).
                                                     28
                                CHAPTER 5

      SETTING UP YOUR CHARTS -
         TECHNICAL INDICATORS

As we setup your charts we are going to focus on keeping things simple and clean. Adding
complexity to your charts will create unnecessary confusion. There are thousands of technical
indicators available to download and install on your chart, but I think they are predominantly
overrated and unnecessary. Technical indicators are almost always lagging indicators. They are
a middleman between you and the price action. A technical indicator is a formula that calculates
current price action and then tries to place the price in a context in order to help predict future
price action. The problem is, that by the time a technical indicator is conŔrming a reversal, the
reversal is already well underway. Like with price action, a trader has to learn to anticipate the
move before it actually happens. We can either learn to read the subtle cues of an indicator or
focus on the candle sticks. I decided I would prefer to become an expert at reading candlestick
shapes and patterns than the moves of a technical indicator. We are cutting out the middleman
and going straight to the price action. The hunt for the perfect combination of indicators that
will give you that added measure of conŔdence can become dangerously close to the hunt for
the Holy Grail. I would encourage you to avoid going down that path and instead, focus on
candlestick patterns as your primary source for Ŕnding setups. In this chapter, I will introduce
you to the technical indicators I use on a daily basis. We will discuss the detailed application of
these indicators later in the book.

                                                                  29
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

               3 Chart Layout showing 5min, 1min, and Daily charts side by side.

                                         My Chart Layout

When I am looking at a stock, I always have three charts that I am watching. The 1min, 5min,
and daily charts. The 1min and 5min charts are zoomed in to show just today's price action, but
the daily chart will usually show the last 3-6 months depending on what I am looking for. On
the daily chart, I will draw out my horizontal trend lines to mark out windows and triggers. On
the 1min and 5min chart, I will draw support and resistance lines throughout the day. I Ŕnd the
visual presence of the lines helps me make decisions about whether a trade is worth taking and
how much room for proŔt it might have.
You will notice that my charts are very clean. I use a few of the most common technical indicators,
but I try to keep it really simple.

                                                                  30
                     HOW TO DAY TRADE

Chart of Moving Averages (Gray is 9 EMA, Blue is 20
        EMA, Red is 50 EMA, Purple is 200 EMA).
                                      31
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

                              Image of standard Moving Average settings.

                                         Moving Averages

Moving averages are one of the most important indicators I use as a day trader. They represent
well respected levels of support and resistance for most stocks on both an intraday and a daily
level. While using moving averages alone are not enough to be a proŔtable trader, they are an
important indicator on our charts because they show the direction of the trend. Stocks trading
above their moving averages are considered in an uptrend while stocks below their moving
averages are in a downtrend. Therefore, when price crosses a moving average there will be a lot
of traders that take notice and adjust their positions.

                                                                  32
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE
There are two types of moving averages. Simple moving averages (SMA) and exponential moving
averages (EMA). All moving averages are calculated as the average price of a stock over a set
period of time. A 9 period moving average is based on the last 9 candles. A 9 period moving
average on a 5min chart will be different from the 9 period moving average on a 15min, 60min,
or daily chart, since the last 9 periods will be different for those time frames. A simple moving
average is the average price over the set number of periods. An exponential moving average
takes the average over the set number of periods, but will weigh the most recent price action
more heavily, so that the moving average moves quickly in response to more recent moves. As a
day trader, we are making quick decisions and therefore need an indicator that responds quickly.
I use exponential moving averages. The moving averages I have on each of my charts are the 9
EMA, the 20 EMA, the 50 EMA and the 200 EMA.

             Chart of a stock respecting the 9 EMA (in gray). Each moving average
       pullback is a buying opportunity. Additionally, the moment the price crosses

               below the moving average marks a potential change in the trend.
                                                                  33
                                                     ROSS CAMERON

    Chart of a trend reversal. The stock was trading below the 9 and 20 EMA, but near
 the red arrow the price crossed over the moving averages. The Ŕrst pullback after the
  price crossed the moving average (labeled #1) took the form of a bull Áag and was a
 great entry. The 2nd, 3rd, and 4th moving average pullbacks were also potential entries.
Trending stocks usually respect either the 9 EMA or the 20 EMA. I prefer to trade stocks trending
along the 9 EMA because that shows more strength. Trending stocks will have a pattern of
making quick moves up and then consolidate sideways until they tap the 9 EMA, then move
back up again. This means if I am in a trending stock, I can set a conservative stop loss slightly
below the 9 EMA support level and adjust it as the price moves. Alternatively, if I see a trending
stock following this pattern and I want to jump in, I will recognize the moving average as a good
potential entry point since it is being respected as support. By entering near the support of the
moving average I will typically have a tight stop with good proŔt potential. When a trending
stock makes moving average pullbacks I will typically buy the Ŕrst and second pullback most

                                                                  34
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE
aggressively and be a bit cautious on later pullbacks. When stocks are trending, we want to buy
as close to moving average support as possible to reduce risk. In contrast, if I am looking to
take a reversal trade, I will usually look to take a position when the price is extremely extended
and has moved away from the 9 EMA. The plan is to take proŔts on part of the trade when price
comes back to the 9 EMA to test that support or resistance level.

                Chart of a stock respecting the 200 EMA (dark purple trend line).

                         Importance of the 200 moving average

While I primarily use the 9 EMA on my 5min and 1min charts, the 200 EMA is also a very well
respected moving average. It is not uncommon to Ŕnd support or resistance at the 200 EMA on

                                                                  35
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
the 5min chart, and especially on the daily chart. I often trade cautiously around the 200 moving
average because I recognize stocks may consolidate before breaking away from that level. If I
am looking for a reversal trade and the price is running into resistance at the 200 EMA I would
consider that to be a stronger setup. Most of the momentum trades I take will be well above
the 200 EMA. I rarely take trades to the long side that are below the 200 EMA or take trades to
the short side that are above the 200 EMA.

                                         Chart of the VWAP indicator.
                                                                  36
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                                     Image of standard VWAP settings.

                        Volume Weighted Average price (VWAP)

In addition to the standard moving averages, I use the Volume Weighted Average Price (VWAP).
Just as the exponential moving averages give weight to recent price action, the VWAP weighs
the amount of volume that traded at each price more heavily. The VWAP gives us a really good
understanding of the average price of the stock over the course of the day, because it factors in
how many shares were traded. The VWAP is the equilibrium point of a stock on any given day. If
we are looking for countertrend setups, we would want to Ŕnd a stock that is extremely extended

                                                                  37
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
away from its equilibrium point. For trend based trading, I generally look to Ŕnd entries close
to the VWAP. This is not always possible if a stock has made a really strong intraday move. In
cases where the price is extended from the VWAP, but I still want to take a trend based trade, I
will refer back to the price relative to the 9 EMA.

                               Chart with Candle outside Bollinger Bands.
                                                                  38
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                               Image of standard Bollinger Bands settings.

                                          Bollinger Bands

I use Bollinger Bands exclusively for timing reversal trades. I use a standard 20 period moving
average with a 2.0 standard deviation for my Bollinger Bands. This is the default setting for the
indicator. As a counter trend trader, we have to be very careful not to enter a reversal trade
too soon. We want to enter stocks as close to the maximum extension point, and then ride the
momentum when the trend reverses. In order to get good entries, I wait for candles to trade
outside the Bollinger Bands. You will notice that almost all of the price action on any given day

                                                                  39
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
will take place inside the Bollinger Bands. Therefore, anytime the price is outside the Bollinger
Bands, it's an extreme situation. It is important to remember that prices can stay outside the
Bollinger Bands during a parabolic move, so we still have to be cautious about entering too
soon. The reason we trade intraday extremes, like candles outside Bollinger Bands, is because
we know this is where we will Ŕnd above average volume. In order to make sure any reversal
is trading at extremes, I keep the Bollinger Bands on my 5min charts. I do not use them on the
daily charts or the 1min charts.

                                     Chart with Relative Strength Index.
                                                                  40
                                                 HOW TO DAY TRADE

                                        Image of standard RSI settings.

                                Relative Strength Index (RSI)

I use the Relative Strength Index (RSI) exclusively for reversal trades. Like a candle fully outside
the Bollinger Bands, when RSI is below 20 or above 80, it indicates an intraday extreme. Many of
best reversal trades will have an RSI below 5 or above 95. RSI is measured on a scale of 0-100, and
it represents the strength of the stock. A reading of 90 or 95, indicates an extremely overbought
condition while 5-10, represents an oversold condition. Many traders jump to the conclusion that
when RSI is at extremes, the trend cannot possibly get any more extended and could change

                                                                  41
                                                     ROSS CAMERON
directions. It is important to note that since RSI can remain at extremes for a long period of time,
it is not a reliable buy or sell indicator without additional conŔrmation. Stocks that are trending
slowly, up or down, generally don't always show RSI extremes. The RSI extremes are more often
combined with parabolic moves or long trends that Ŕnally peak with one last surge. Instead of
keeping RSI on my charts, I have created a Ŕlter in my stock scanners to only show me reversal
stock ideas when the RSI is below 20 or above 80.

                                              Image of Volume Bars.

                                            Volume Bars

The Ŕnal technical indicator that I use on a daily basis are simple volume bars. These bars tell us
how many shares of volume were traded during a candlestick period. Volume is a critical piece
of information for my trading strategies. It would be very difŔcult for me to trade without the
volume bars. I need to have a sense of the increasing and decreasing volume as momentum
builds and then fades. When I see decreasing volume during a trend, it can be an indicator that
the trend is about to change directions. Additionally, during periods of consolidation, seeing an
increase in volume can suggest a potential break back into a trend.

                                                                  42
